# Red Hat AppStudio E2E Tests and Testing Framework

Testing framework and E2E tests are written in [Go](https://go.dev/) using [Ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) and [Gomega](https://onsi.github.io/gomega/) frameworks to cover Red Hat AppStudio.
It is recommended to install AppStudio in E2E mode, but the E2E suite can be also usable in [development and preview modes](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments#preview-mode-for-your-clusters).

# Features

* Instrumented tests with Ginkgo 2.0 framework. You can find more information in [Ginkgo documentation](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/).
* Uses client-go to connect to OpenShift Cluster.
* Ability to run the E2E tests everywhere: locally([CRC/OpenShift local](https://developers.redhat.com/products/openshift-local/overview)), OpenShift Cluster, OSD...
* Writes tests results in JUnit XML/JSON file to a custom directory by using `--ginkgo.junit(or json)-report` flag.
* Ability to run the test suites separately.

# Running the tests
When you want to run the E2E tests for AppStudio you need to have installed tools(in Requirements chapter), installed the AppStudio in E2E mode and compiled `e2e-appstudio` binary.

## Requirements
Requirements for installing AppStudio in E2E mode and running the E2E tests:

* An OpenShift 4.11 or higher Environment (If you are using CRC/OpenShift Local please also review [optional-codeready-containers-post-bootstrap-configuration](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments#optional-codeready-containers-post-bootstrap-configuration))
* A machine from which to run the install (usually your laptop) with required tools:
  * A properly setup Go workspace using **Go 1.18 is required**
  * The OpenShift Command Line Tool (oc) **Use the version coresponding to the Openshift version**
  * yq
  * jq
  * git
* Tokens
  * Github Token with the following permissions
    * `repo`
    * `delete_repo`
  * Valid quay token where to push AppStudio components images generated by the e2e framework

## Install AppStudio in E2E mode

Before executing the e2e suites you need to have deployed AppStudio in E2E Mode to your cluster.

1. Before deploying AppStudio in E2E mode you need to login to your OpenShift cluster with OpenShift Command Line Tool as `admin` (by default  `kubeadmin`):

   ```bash
    oc login -u <user> -p <password> --server=<oc_api_url>
   ```

2. Export required (and recommended) environment variables (i.e. `export ENV_VAR_NAME=value ENV_VAR2_NAME=value`) from the table below.

The following environment variables are used to launch the Red Hat AppStudio installation in E2E mode and the tests execution (tokens are also used for running the tests):

| Variable | Required | Explanation | Default Value |
|---|---|---|---|
| `GITHUB_TOKEN` | yes | A github token used to create AppStudio applications in github  | ''  |
| `QUAY_TOKEN` | yes | A quay token to push components images to quay.io. Note the quay token must be your dockerconfigjson encoded in base64 format. Example: `export QUAY_TOKEN=$(base64 < ~/.docker/config.json)` | '' |
| `MY_GITHUB_ORG` | no (recommended) | GitHub organization (must be organization, cannot use regular GitHub account!) where to create/push Red Hat AppStudio Applications. You can create your GitHub organization for free  | `redhat-appstudio-qe`  |
| `QUAY_E2E_ORGANIZATION` | no (recommended) | Quay organization/account where to push components containers. It is recommended to create your own account | `redhat-appstudio-qe` |
| `E2E_APPLICATIONS_NAMESPACE` | no | Name of the namespace used for running HAS E2E tests | `appstudio-e2e-test` |
| `PRIVATE_DEVFILE_SAMPLE` | no | The name of the private git repository used in HAS E2E tests. Your GITHUB_TOKEN should be able to read from it. | `https://github.com/redhat-appstudio-qe/private-quarkus-devfile-sample` |
| `QUAY_OAUTH_USER` | no | A valid quay robot account username to make quay oauth | '' |
| `QUAY_OAUTH_TOKEN` | no | A valid quay quay robot account token to make oauth against quay.io. | '' |
| `DOCKER_IO_AUTH` | no | A valid docker.io token to avoid pull limits in the format: username:access_token, eg. `export DOCKER_IO_AUTH=susdas:43228532-b374-11ec-989b-98fa9b70b97d` | '' |
| `INFRA_DEPLOYMENTS_ORG` | no | A specific github organization from where to download infra-deployments repository | `redhat-appstudio` |
| `INFRA_DEPLOYMENTS_BRANCH` | no | A valid infra-deployments branch. | `main` |
| `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL` | no | Run only test suites with the given Giknkgo label | '' |
| `KLOG_VERBOSITY` | no | Level of verbosity for `klog` | 1 |

1. Install dependencies:

``` bash
# Install dependencies
$ go mod tidy
# or go mod tidy -compat=1.18
# Copy the dependencies to vendor folder
$ go mod vendor
```

1. Install Red Hat AppStudio in e2e mode. By default the installation script will use the `redhat-appstudio-qe` GitHub organization for pushing changes to `infra-deployments` repository.

**It is recommended to use your fork of [infra-deployments repo](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments) in your GitHub org instead** - you can change the GitHub organization with environment variable `export MY_GITHUB_ORG=<name-of-your-github-org>`.

   ```bash
      make local/cluster/prepare
   ```

More information about how to deploy Red Hat AppStudio
are in the [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments) repository.

## Building and running the e2e tests
You can use the following make target to build and run the tests:
   ```bash
      make local/test/e2e
   ```

Or build and run the tests without scripts:
1. Install dependencies and build the tests:

   ``` bash
   # Install dependencies
   $ go mod tidy
   # Copy the dependencies to vendor folder
   $ go mod vendor
   # Create `e2e-appstudio` binary in bin folder. Please add the binary to the path or just execute `./bin/e2e-appstudio`
   $ make build
   ```

2. Run the e2e tests:
The `e2e-appstudio` command is the root command that executes all test functionality. To obtain all available flags for the binary please use `--help` flags. All ginkgo flags and go tests are available in `e2e-appstudio` binary.

Some tests could require you to have specific container image repo's created (if you're using your own container image org/user account (`QUAY_E2E_ORGANIZATION`) or your own GitHub organization (`MY_GITHUB_ORG`) 
In that case, before you run the test, make sure you have created
* `test-images` repo in quay.io, i.e. `quay.io/<QUAY_E2E_ORGANIZATION>/test-images` and make it **public**
  * also make sure that the docker config, that is encoded in the value of `QUAY_TOKEN` environment variable, contains a correct credentials required to push to `test-images` repo. And make sure the robot account or user account has the **write** permissions set for `test-images` repo which is required by the tests to push the generated artifacts.
* forked following GitHub repositories to your org (specified in `MY_GITHUB_ORG` env var)
  * https://github.com/redhat-appstudio-qe/devfile-sample-hello-world (for running build-service tests)
  * https://github.com/redhat-appstudio-qe/hacbs-test-project (for mvp-demo test)

   ```bash
    `./bin/e2e-appstudio`
   ```

The instructions for every test suite can be found in the [tests folder](tests), e.g. [has Readme.md](tests/has/README.md).
You can also specify which tests you want to run using [labels](docs/LabelsNaming.md) or [Ginkgo Focus](docs/DeveloperFocus.md).

# Red Hat AppStudio Load Tests

Load tests for AppStudio are also in this repository. More information about load tests are in [LoadTests.md](docs/LoadTests.md).

# Running Red Hat AppStudio Tests in OpenShift CI

Overview for OpenShift CI and AppStudio E2E tests is in [OpenshiftCI.md](docs/OpenShiftCI.md). How to install E2E binary is in [Installation.md](docs/Installation.md).

# Develop new tests

 The current structure of how tests are stored in this repo are as follows:

 * The equivalent of Ginkgo Suites, `*_suite_test.go`, reside in the `cmd/` directory
 * The equivalent of Ginkgo Tests,  `*_test.go`, reside in the `tests/` directory

We've provided some tooling to generate test suite packages and test spec files to get you up and running a little faster:

```bash
      make local/template/generate-test-spec
      make local/template/generate-test-suite
```

For more information refer to [Generate Tests](docs/DeveloperGenerateTest.md).

## Tips
* Make sure you've implemented any required controller functionality that is required for your tests within the following files
   * `pkg/utils/<new controller directory>` - net new controller logic for a new service or component
   * `pkg/framework/framework.go` - import the new controller and update the `Framework` struct to be able to initialize the new controller
* Every test package should be imported to `cmd/e2e_test.go`, e.g. [has](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/blob/main/cmd/e2e_test.go#L15).
* Every new test should have correct [labels](docs/LabelsNaming.md).
* Every test should have meaningful description with JIRA/GitHub issue key.
* (Recommended) Use JIRA integration for linking issues and commits (just add JIRA issue key in the commit message).
* When running via mage you can filter the suites run by specifying the
  `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL` environment variable. For example:
  `E2E_TEST_SUITE_LABEL=ec ./mage runE2ETests`
* `klog` level can be controled via `KLOG_VERBOSITY` environment variable. For
  example: `KLOG_VERBOSITY=9 ./mage runE2ETests` would output `curl` commands
  issued via Kubernetes client from sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime

```golang
// cmd/e2e_test.go
package common

import (
	// ensure these packages are scanned by ginkgo for e2e tests
	_ "github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/tests/common"
	_ "github.com/redhat-appstudio/e2e-tests/tests/has"
)
```

# Troubleshooting e2e-tests issues in openshift-ci
Every Prow job executed by the CI system generates an artifacts directory containing information about that execution and its results. This [document](https://docs.ci.openshift.org/docs/how-tos/artifacts/) describes the contents of this directory and how they can be used to investigate the steps by the job.

The “artifacts” link in the job result page leads to a page containing every file uploaded by that job. For AppStudio jobs there are three important folders in artifacts:
* **redhat-appstudio_e2e-tests/redhat-appstudio-e2e/***               - Store xunit files related to appstudio e2e-tests.
* **redhat-appstudio_e2e-tests/redhat-appstudio-gather/***            - Store appstudio Kube APIs information. Components, Application, Environment etc.
* **redhat-appstudio_e2e-tests/redhat-appstudio-hypershift-gather/*** - Store all cluster pods logs, events, configmaps etc. This artifacts are present only with hypershift installer.
* **redhat-appstudio_e2e-tests/gather-extra/***                       - Store all cluster pods logs, events, configmaps etc. This artifacts are present only when we dont use hypershift.

# Reporting issues
For reporting issues with e2e tests please use [STONE Jira project](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/STONE) - please use labels `ci-fail` and `quality`. For existing issues, see [this Jira query](https://issues.redhat.com/issues/?jql=labels%20%3D%20%22ci-fail%22%20and%20labels%20%3D%20%22quality%22%20and%20resolution%20%3D%20unresolved).

# Debugging tests
## In vscode
There is launch configuration in `.vscode/launch.json` called `Launch demo suites`.
Running this configuration, you'll be asked for github token and then e2e-demos suite will run with default configuration.
If you want to run/debug different suite, change `-ginkgo.focus` parameter in `.vscode/launch.json`.

# Cleanup of redhat-appstudio-qe org

Our automated tests running in CI create lot of repositories in our redhat-appstudio-qe github org.

There is a mage target that can cleanup those repositories - `mage local:cleanupGithubOrg`.

For more infor & usage, please run `mage -h local:cleanupGithubOrg`.
